---
layout: post
title: Listen!
teaser: Make your tasks pay fuckin' attention. 
intro: " 
Once you've got a smooth setup for doing some necessary task working properly (we'll use the ruby script from the <a href='/2014/11/05/DIY-sprockets.html'>previous post</a> as an example) the next step is to get that bad boy automated. Luckily there are alot of tools available for just this purpose, as you'll see shortly.
<p>
Since we started off this series in jekyll-land, we'll continue to use that assumption about our script. And in that case, said script isn't exactly the most robust thing around - so we definitively need to toughen it up a bit as well. Holy segmentation fault, Batman - this is gonna be swell!"
color: yellow
image: listen.svg
tags: code ruby
---

## If you like it then you better make a gem out of it

The amazing people behind [guard](https://github.com/guard/guard) have released part of their work as a stand-alone gem which listens for file changes in a given set of directories. Can you guess what it's called? Yes, I'm fully aware there's no way for you to answer that question. Anyway, it's called *listen*<sup id="fnref-1"><a class="footnote" href="#fn-1">1</a></sup>.

Since we're not in TDD land, unless you're actually *testing* your blog posts (in which case you might want to go outside for a bit), guard itself would probably be overkill for our purposes. Instead we can use *listen* to notify us when we need to perform our tasks.

You can provide a directory (or a set of directories) to the `Listen.to` method, and this will yield an array of modified files to the block you specify. Let's use haml compilation as an example to demonstrate.

```ruby
haml_listener = Listen.to(@haml) do |modified, added, removed|
  if modified
    p "#{modified[0]} modified, recompiling haml"
    compile_haml(modified[0])
  elsif added
    p "#{added[0]} added, compile haml" 
    compile_haml(added[0])
  end
```
Easy peasy burger McCheesy. We simply tell *listen* to watch over our haml directory, and whenever something is modified or added, simply recompile the haml files. We also added some pimpin' `puts` statements to let us know what's automagically going on.

Now that we've got some automatic compilation going on, we might notice - once we fire up our `sprockets.rb` script - that even if we see the puts messages, the files aren't getting compiled every time we save. What gives?

## Errors 'n stuff

Well, as I said (wrote) [last time around](/2014/11/05/DIY-Sprockets.html), we haven't really made the most robust script ever. In fact we don't handle errors at all. 

Now the fattest, lowest hanging fruit hanging around is called `Haml::SyntaxError`. This is 99.99999% likely to be the only error produced by running this script (unless you've got 1KB of memory or something), so let's kick that chump to the curb.

```ruby
def compile_haml(file)
  file_name = "#{File.basename(file, '.haml')}.html"
  begin
    html = File.open(file, 'r') { |file| Haml::Engine.new(file.read).render }
  rescue Haml::SyntaxError => error
    p error
    return
  end
  relative_path = get_relative(File.path(file))
  new_path  = "#{Dir.pwd}/#{relative_path}/#{file_name}" 
  File.open(new_path, 'w') { |file| file.write(html) }

  p "Wrote #{new_path}."
end
```
Bam! Error handled, bitch! 

You might also notice that I've added a `relative_path` variable (with accompanying helper method). This simply determines which folder the compiled html should be placed in, and you can look at it to your heart's content in the source code I'll provide at the end of the article.

The `begin`/`rescue` clause surrounding the actual haml compilation rescues syntax errors and prints them to the console. We also explicitly return from our method call since there's really no point in continuing execution when there's no html to write.

Success! We now have automatic haml compilation in your jekyll (or other static website) project. Give yourself a well-deserved pat on the back.

## \*Cough\*ee

Right, there was something about coffeescript as well. Well, we can solve this pretty much the same way as we just did with haml. Check this bad boy out.

```ruby
barista = Listen.to(@coffee) do |modified, added, removed|
  p "recompiling coffeescript"
  compile_coffeescript
  p "coffeescript compiled, lets minify that shit"
  minify_coffeescript
end
```
As you can see, this looks mysteriously like the same listener we defined for our haml compilation. The only real difference is that we don't need to pass the *actual file* to our compilation method, since we recompile everything anyway.

The observant reader (man, I love college textbooks) will notice that there's a new method added here as well. I'll talk more about what `minify_coffeescript` does later, though I assume its purpose is pretty obvious. [It injects the coffeescript with bear gifs, obviously](https://slack-imgs.com/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fmedia.giphy.com%2Fmedia%2FbedJzNQ30Sq0E%2Fgiphy.gif&width=365&height=301).

Just as with the haml compilation we want to ensure that any syntax errors in our coffeescript (unexpected indentation, anyone?) is brought to our attention and not simply quietly failing in the background. Thus, this is how our new `compile_coffeescript` method looks.

```ruby
def compile_coffeescript
  target, javascript = "#{@root}/public/application.js", ''
  File.readlines("#{@coffee}/Manifest").each do |line|
    begin
      file = "#{@coffee}/#{line.gsub('#', '').strip}.coffee"
      javascript += File.open(file, 'r') { |file| CoffeeScript.compile file.read }
    rescue ExecJS::RuntimeError => error
      p error
      return
    end
  end
  File.open(target, 'w') { |file| file.write(javascript) }
end
```
This employs pretty much the same approach as the last method we saw, wrapping the compilation in a `begin`/`rescue` block and explicitly returning if there's an error. There is one thing here which I haven't talked about yet, though - the Manifest.

## It's all about the order, man

Javascript is a fickle beast. By which I mean it's easy to fuck it up if you're not paying attention, which I constantly don't. For instance it's important to define dependencies in the correct order - `$(document).ready()` doesn't work half as well if the actual jquery script hasn't been loaded yet.

Enter the manifest. 

It's a fancy name for a simple text file which lists the compilation order of the coffeescript files in your application. You don't really need it unless there's an explicit order you want (I like to organize my scripts in classes so I need a certain order), but the original [sprockets](https://github.com/sstephenson/sprockets) uses it - so I want to as well.

This is what my *manifest* file contains:

```
# lib/post
# lib/image
# lib/header
# blog
```
All it does is essentially say "hey, compile lib/post before lib/image" and so on. That's it.

So our script reads each line for the manifest, compiles the coffeescript and appends it to the ever growing `javascript` variable. Once our compilation is over however - we finally get to the `minify` method!

```ruby
def minify_coffeescript
  File.open('./public/application.min.js', 'w') do |file|
    file.write Uglifier.compile(File.read("#{@root}/public/application.js"))
  end
end
```
Not very exciting I know, sorry for hyping it up. All it does is utilise the [uglifier](https://github.com/lautis/uglifier) gem to read our recently created `application.js` file and minify it into a new file called `application.min.js` - which we can reference from the layouts.

One last thing we need to consider is vendor scripts - my personal go to guys include [jquery](http://jquery.com) and [underscore](http://underscorejs.org) - though this can easily be handled like so:

```ruby
# inside compile_coffeescript
Dir.glob("#{@root}/public/vendor/*.js") do |vendor_js|
  javascript += File.open(vendor_js, 'r') { |file| file.read }  
end
```
## Totes amaze

Yes, I agree.

This way, using gems like `haml`, `coffeescript`, `listen`, and `uglifier`, we have essentially created our own rails-esque workflow in an entirely different context. I think that's pretty cool.

It totally works too! In fact, this blog was written using these tools. If you want take a peek at the code for the script in its finished glory, you can check out [this gist](https://gist.github.com/nicohvi/208bb730c7ed58261779), or check out the github repository<sup id="fnref-2"><a href="fn-2"class="footnote">2</a></sup>.

<div id="notes">
  <hr>
</div>

<ol>
  <li id="fn-1"> Github repository for the <a href="https://github.com/guard/listen">listen gem</a>. <a href="#fnref-1">↩</a></li>
  <li id="fn-2">Github repository for <a href="https://github.com/nicohvi/nicohvi.github.io">this blog</a>.<a href="#fnref-2">↩</a></li>
</ol>
