---
layout: post
title: Streams 'n shit
teaser: Reactive programming for idiots.
intro: "
You've heard all the buzz about <a href=''>functional programming</a>, right? It's apparently, undoubtedly, the best thing to happen in the programming scene since ascii-art. The only problem, though, is that it seems like no one can really agree on exactly what it <i>is</i>. Though are are certainly no shortages of blog posts about it (man, how meta is this?).
<p>
Today we'll focus entirely on the <i>reactive</i> aspects of programming, and <i>functions</i> will just be a natural side effect of that. If you've never taken a gander at FRP (functional reactive programming) before then you're in luck - this <i>is</i> the blog post you're looking for. And just like your pathetic attempts to woo the cute girl in the design team - you have to start somewhere (<a href='http://i.imgur.com/m0U7yU6.gif'>before eventually getting rejected</a>)."
tags: code FRP javascript
color: green
image: frp.svg
---

## You've got some functions in your functions
Ever heard of higher-order functions<sup id="fnref-1"><a href="#fn-1" class="footnote">1</a></sup> (HOFs)? 

We can use these to do some cool things, like for instance **filter** an array (or whatever) based on a condition or maybe **reduce** the array to a value based on some operation. Notice how I **bolded** those words like a pedantic, condesending teacher? Don't you just hate it when people do that?

The Rattata of HOFs is called **map**, and it's also my personal favourite (unlike the actual Rattata, who is a total Hyper Fanging bitch, hate that guy). Map applies the passed function to all arguments on the object it's invoked upon (like an array for instance) and returns a *a new object containing the values of the function call*. That last bit's important.

```coffeescript
# This is how map is implemented in lodash (simplified)
map = (collection, callback, context) ->
  index = -1
  result = Array(collection.length) # A totally new array!
  while (++index < collection.length) 
    # Add the result of the passed function (callback) to the new array
    result[index] = callback(collection[index], index, collection)
  result 
```
## Just streamin' along

So, what exactly *is* FRP? It's hard to put into words without being too generic or rambling on forever, but [this guy](https://gist.github.com/staltz/868e7e9bc2a7b8c1f754) does a pretty good job.

FRP is all about [streams, man](http://s10.postimg.org/aw2712xo9/3056035_the_dude_forum.jpg). You create streams, you manipulate streams and you subscribe to streams. 

We'll use the terms *observable* and *stream* interchangeably, since a stream is just a continuous series of observable values (that can be manipulated).

"Yeah, yeah yeah - heard that before" you might think, growing impatient with my ramblings. Code speaks louder than words, so let's look at an actual example showing what I mean instead of throwing out words like some kind of idiot.

For our example we'll create a movie recommendation system (or, rather, steal one) based on ratings from rottentomates and IMDB<sup id="fnref-2"><a class="footnote" href="#fn-2">2</a></sup>. To demonstrate FRP we'll use the lovely [bacon.js](https://github.com/baconjs/bacon.js/) library. Yes that's the actual name.

The application will be simple: You type in the name of a movie, select the movie you want (if more than one is returned from the server) and ask for similar movies. Easy, right?

First off, we need a *stream* which notifies us whenever someone clicks our [magic button](http://make-everything-ok.com/) to search for a movie.


```coffeescript
# markup
%input#query
%button#query-button
%section.movies

# jquery objects
movieList        = $('.movies')
queryButton      = $('#query-botton') 

# stream
queryClickStream = queryButton.asEventStream('click')
``` 

Whenever someone clicks the `queryButton` the `queryClickStream` emits a value. We need to call our server (which in turn calls the external APIs) every time this button is clicked, so let's do that.

Remember our old friend `map`?

```coffeescript
queryURLStream = queryClickStream
  .map ->
    "/movies/search?movie=#{$('#query').val()}"
```
`map` invokes the function we pass it to each value emitted from the `queryURLStream`. Notice that it doesn't even use the actual *value* emitted by the stream, it simply uses the fact that the stream emits a value as a cue to do its thing. Now that's some reactive shit right there.

"Hey - what if you just hit the return key instead of clicking the button? It would be pretty annyoing if that didn't submit the query!"

Totally.

```coffeescript
enterKeys = $(document).asEventStream('keyup').filter (event) -> event.which == 13
```

Since `filter` removes all values for which the passed function returns **false** only enter keys will be emitted from the `enterKeys` stream. Now we need to **merge** (sorry, I'm trying to stop) this stream with the `queryClickStream` in order to get what we want.

```coffeescript
queryURLStream = queryClickStream
  .merge(enterKeys)
  # ... same as last time
```
Huzzah!

Anyway, this new stream of ours (aptly called `queryURLStream`) emits a string containing the input for our search query every time a user clicks on our lovely button (or slams down the return key). We should probably do something with this string.

```coffeescript
responseStream = queryURLStream
  .flatMap (url) -> Bacon.fromPromise($.getJSON(url))
```

Hold up - who's that new guy? `flatMap` is quite an amazing creature - it transforms the value sequence from one or more observables and then **flattens** them into a *new* stream<sup id="fnref-3"><a href="#fn-3" class="footnote">3</a></sup>. 

`Bacon.fromPromise` (unsurprisingly) returns an observable form a promise (`$.getJSON`) once the promise yields a result - whether that's an error or a value. However, we want to return the **value** of the promise rather than the observable from our `responseStream`. This is where `flatMap` comes in. 

`flatMap` flattens the returned observable from `Bacon.fromPromise` and emits the value it yields.  

Had we instead used our old pal `map` for this purpose  we would've received the *actual* observable as the value of the `responseStream` rather than the value of the JSON call. Not very useful.

And just like that we've successfully called our server and we even have a stream containing the results of these calls. Let's do something with that stream.

```coffeescript
# movieListTemplate = Handlebars.compile $('#movie-list-template').html()
movieListStream = responseStream
  .map (json) -> ._map(json.movies, (movie) -> movieListTemplate(movie))
```

This final piece of the puzzle simply transforms the returned JSON to HTML using handlebars<sup id="fnref-4"><a href="#fn-4" class="footnote">4</a></sup> and then emits these lovely new HTML strings we would very much like to add to our DOM.

If you're scratching your head wondering what the hell that `_` character is doing there, that is simply a reference to [lodash](http://www.lodash.org) - which is a great utility library providing the functions we've all grown to love (`map` in this instance).

In order to do add the HTML we've generated to the DOM we could just operate on this stream using `map` (or any other function, really) - but since we don't need to return any more values, there's no need to use a stream for this. Let's *observe* instead.

## FINISH HIM

```coffeescript
movieListStream.onValue (html) -> movieList.html(html)
```

Bam! 

`onValue` is invoked every time the observed stream emits a value, and this way we ensure that once we receive HTML from our `movieListStream` we simply add it to the DOM.

To summarize:

1. Every time a user clicks on the search button a form is submitted to our server
`queryClickStream + enterKeys -> queryURLStream -> responseStream`
2. A call is made from our server to rotten tomatoes and IMDB<sup id="fnref-5"><a href="#fn-5" class="footnote">5</a></sup>
3. A JSON hash is returned from the server and finally formatted through a handlebars template and added to our view.<br>
`responseStream -> movieListStream -> movieListStream.onValue`

Magic!

As I said initially I wanted to make (steal) a movie recommendation system. 

Obviously we're not quite there yet. The code I've shown you only calls a server and does something with the response, though it should hopefully illustrate *how* one can use FRP to build such a thing. 

I'm not a big fan of overloading on information early on, and I feel like this blog post has already gone on for long enough, so I'll instead link to a [github repository](https://github.com/nicohvi/moviepicker/blob/master/app/assets/javascripts/moviepicker.coffee) showing the finished result you can peruse at your own time and leisure.

The whole thing is ~70 LOC, which I think is [pretty damn cool](http://www.billboard.com/files/stylus/109795-vanilla_ice_617_409.jpg). 

<div class="notes"><hr></div>

<ol>
  <li id="fn-1">They're actually pretty simple, and <i>really</i> powerful. They are called HOFs because they <i>take a function as an argument</i>, that's it.<a href="#fnref-1">↩</a></li>
  <li id="fn-2">Unfortunately IMDB doesn't provide an API, lazy bastards.<a href="#fnref-2">↩</a></li>
  <li id="fn-3"><a href="https://github.com/ReactiveX/RxJava/wiki/Transforming-Observables#flatmap-concatmap-and-flatmapiterable">This</a> is a good way to picture <i>flatMap</i>.<a href="#fnref-3">↩</a></li>
  <li id="fn-4"><a href="http://handlebarsjs.com/">Website</a>.<a href="#fnref-4">↩</a></li>
  <li id="fn-5">Relevant <a href="https://github.com/nicohvi/moviepicker/blob/master/app/controllers/movies_controller.rb">ruby code</a>.<a href="#fnref-5">↩</a></li>
</ol>
